- This episode of LegalEagle
was made possible by Skillshare.
Learn to think like a lawyer
for free for two months
by clicking the link in the description.
Some of the facts are
contested and some are not.
Ahmaud Arbery, a 25 year
old man was shot to death
on February 23rd in Brunswick, Georgia.
Arbery was being followed
by Gregory McMichael
and Travis McMichael,
his son, in their truck.
Arbery's family says
that he was out jogging
while the McMichaels say that
they thought he was a burglar.
Two things that are not
necessarily mutually exclusive.
Three prosecutors recused themselves
from handling the case due
to conflicts of interest.
Initially, the McMichaels
were not arrested
or charged with Arbery's death.
Then a disturbing video of the killing
was released to the public.
The video provoked outrage
and spurred state authorities
to actually act.
And the two McMichaels were arrested
for felony murder 74
days after the killing.
Now the case is a flashpoint
for arguments about racism
and conflicts of interest,
stand your ground laws
and citizen's arrests.
Politicians like Joe
Biden and President Trump
have both weighed in and understandably,
everyone has lots of
questions about this case,
some things we can probably
be fairly certain about.
And some things we may never know.
But either way, let's think like a lawyer.
Now, before we get into
too much of the analysis
in this particular case,
I think a couple of
disclaimers are in order.
Number one, everyone is
entitled to the presumption
of innocence in the
criminal justice system.
When you are accused of a crime,
it is the prosecutor's duty to prove
that crime beyond a reasonable doubt.
It doesn't necessarily
mean that you're innocent
if the prosecution
doesn't meet that burden.
But it does mean that you are
entitled to that presumption.
Now when we're talking about
things in popular culture,
we don't necessarily use
the beyond a reasonable doubt standard.
But in a case like this,
some of the evidence is known,
some of it's public, some of its not,
and some of the information
may never be known.
So we'll never know the objective truth
with respect to the situation,
and multiple things can
be true at the same time.
So more information is going to come out
and we're going to be
analyzing things based
on what we know today, that may change.
Evidence may come out
that supports prosecution
or supports the defense.
We don't know what is out there
and what isn't out there,
and what may or may not come to light.
Oh, and finally,
we're going to be looking
at some fairly disturbing
cellphone and security footage.
So if you are bothered
by that sort of thing,
just be aware.
With that being said,
let's dig into the facts
as we currently know them.
According to the police report,
sometime around 1:00
p.m. Gregory McMichael
was in his son's front yard
when he saw Ahmaud Arbery
running down the street.
He ran inside and called out to his son,
"Travis, the guy is running
down the street, let's go."
Gregory grabbed his 357 Magnum
while Travis picked up his shotgun.
They ran outside and got in their truck.
Now according to the police report,
a third man later identified
as neighbor William Bryan,
followed in a separate vehicle.
Brian filmed the chase itself.
The McMichaels say that Bryan also trying
to block Arbery during the pursuit,
but Bryan disputes this claim.
Now because I think It's
important to the analysis
that goes on here,
here is the video footage
taken from the cell phone
of Bryan as he was in
pursuit of Ahmaud Arbery.
(gunshot explodes)
So allegedly Travis
McMichael drove down the road
until he spotted Arbery
running toward an intersection.
Travis trying to cut him off.
This led Arbery to start
"running back in the
direction from which he came,"
according to the police report.
Travis trying to cut him off
with the truck a second time,
then Gregory jumped into the truck bed
and then continued to chase Arbery down.
Gregory and Travis told police
that they started yelling,
"Stop, stop, we want to talk to you."
Arbery didn't stop.
Next, Travis pulled up next to Aubrey
and said he wanted to talk.
He then left the truck
with a shotgun in hand.
Gregory then told police
that Arbery started
to violently attack Travis,
and the two men then started
fighting over the shotgun,
at which point Travis fired a
shot and then a second later,
there was a second shot.
Gregory then told police
that Arbery started to
"violently attack Travis
"and the two men then started
fighting over the shotgun,
"at which point Travis
fired a second shot.
"And then a second later,
"there was a second shot.
"McMichael stated that
the male fell face down
"on the pavement with
his hand under his body."
Now according to the autopsy,
Arbery was shot a total of three times,
once in the hand and twice in the chest.
Travis then searched Arbery for a gun,
which there wasn't one and
Arbery bled out on the spot
dying in a matter of minutes.
Gregory McDaniel told police
that he thought Arbery was a burglar
who had recently been
targeting the neighborhood.
The McMichaels told police
that when they caught up with Arbery,
he attacks Travis who fired
his weapon in self defense.
Gregory and his son told police
that they saw Arbery "the other night,"
and that he reached in his pants
as if trying to draw a gun.
They claimed that the
people in the neighborhood
were "fed up"
with the many burglaries in the area.
Now, in this case,
I'm trying to provide a
robust version of events.
Obviously, given the
nature of this dispute,
only one side is going to
be able to tell their side
of the story,
but I think it's important to
allow that side to be heard.
Now, full disclosure,
I think some of this is legally relevant,
and some of it is not actually
legally relevant based
on the charges and the potential defenses.
But we'll get to that in a moment.
But the important thing to
note is that some of the story
is told from one perspective,
some of these facts may be true,
some facts may not be true,
but I think it's important
to at least allow that side
to be heard regardless
of what ultimately the
legal conclusion is.
But let's talk about the evidence
from other sources as well.
Gregory and Travis told
their story to police.
Now Arbery is dead,
obviously he can't tell
his side of the story.
But there are additional sources
of evidence to this killing
and I'm trying to use
the term killing here
instead of murder because
that is a legally loaded term.
But there is another known witness
and that is William
Bryan, who made the video.
If there wasn't a tape,
then we wouldn't know what happened.
Or y'all wouldn't, I would.
Bryan's attorney disputes
the McMichaels claim
that he was helping them chase Arbery
and also said that he had no
relationship with the family.
Bryan describes himself as
a witness and nothing more.
The Brunswick News obtained police records
about burglaries in the area.
The records show that there had been
just one reported burglary
in the neighborhood
between January 1st and February 23rd.
In particular, a handgun was stolen
from an unlocked truck parked
outside of Travis McMichael's
house on January 1st, 2020.
And then on February 11th,
Travis called police
to report a man walking
through a construction site near his home.
Now according to the property owner,
nothing was stolen.
We don't know whether
Arbery was the person
in the construction site on February 11th.
New videos are surfacing that
shows that there were in fact,
other individuals besides Ahmaud Arbery,
who had been looking at
the construction site.
And obviously a lot of people have opined
that looking at houses
that are under construction
is something that
looky-loos do on occasion.
And on the date in question,
there were also two 911 calls
from shortly before the killing.
On the first call at 1:08 p.m.,
an identified caller says,
"There's a guy in a house right now,
"a house under construction."
The dispatcher asks if the man
is breaking into the property
to which the caller responds,
"No, it's all open.
"It's under construction."
The caller then says
he's running right now.
And there he goes right now.
The dispatcher asks,
"Okay, what is he doing?"
The caller replies, "He's
running down the street.
The dispatcher says,
I just need to know
what he was doing wrong.
Was he just on the premises
and not supposed to be.
The caller's response is garbled
and after the noise fades,
the caller still provides no answer,
but the dispatch says she
will send someone out.
At 1:14pm, there's a second call,
a different unidentified person,
potentially one of the McMichael says
that there's a black male
running down the street.
This time the caller
again does not respond
to the dispatcher's request
for more information.
The caller starts yelling,
"Stop, stop that, dammit, stop!"
And a few seconds later,
the caller yells Travis.
The McMichaels have not said
whether they made the 911 calls.
As the first call alludes to,
there's also a surveillance video
from a construction
site near Travis's home.
The video shows a man stopping
briefly to look around,
the man who may be Arbery,
then continues to run.
Arbery lived about two
miles from the subdivision.
Now people have questioned whether Arbery
was just a man out for a jog.
But there's no dispute whether
Arbery was really a runner.
Neighbors verify that Arbery
had gone on daily runs
throughout the neighborhood for years.
But this highlights some of the issues
that often come up with
eyewitness testimony.
The objective facts may not line up
with witnesses subjective beliefs.
It may be the case that Ahmaud Arbery
was in fact jogging that day.
And it may also be the
case at the same time
that the McMichaels
thought he was a robber.
And it may also be the case that
that subjective belief has
no bearing on their actions
or potential defenses to the fact
that they killed Ahmaud Arbery.
We'll get to that in a moment.
But I think it's important to note
that two things can be
true at the same time
in terms of what actually happened,
and people's perception,
and their mental state at that time.
Based on the available evidence,
I think we can conclude a couple of things
to a strong likelihood.
Again, that may change
based on different evidence,
but based on what we know now,
I think we can assume a couple of things.
Number one, Ahmaud Arbery
was running down the street.
Number two, he was unarmed.
Number three, the
McMichaels were in a truck
and had driven past Ahmaud Arbery
to get out in front of him.
And the McMichaels were in fact armed
and got out of their truck
to confront Ahmaud Arbery.
Now, based on those facts alone,
I think we'll probably
have a good head start
in being able to examine
some of the defenses
and charges that were levied
against the McMichaels.
But before we get there,
we have to talk about the actions
of the local district attorney's,
because based on the available evidence,
it seems that things were potentially
not handled in a correct way.
Now it took two months for the police
to actually arrest the McMichaels.
During that time,
three prosecutors recused themselves
from handling the investigation
into Arbery's death.
On February 27th, the
Brunswick District Attorney
recused herself from
the case because Gregory
had been an investigator in
the DA's office for 30 years.
Gregory had also served as a
police officer for seven years.
Then Prosecutor George Barnhill
was appointed to review the case.
In late April, Barnhill
released a letter concluding
that McMichael had "solid
firsthand probable cause"
to pursue Arbery, a burglary suspect.
He said Travis acted in self defense.
He then recused himself from the case.
Now recusal is the act
of a judge or prosecutor
being removed or excusing
themselves from legal case
due to a conflict of interest.
Recusal happens when a prosecutor
cannot handle the case objectively.
And here Barnhill admitted
he had personal connections to Arbery.
Barnhill's son who is also
a Glynn county prosecutor
was involved in earlier
prosecution of Arbery.
Arbery was given five years
probation as a first offender
on charges of carrying a weapon on-campus
and several counts of obstructing
a law enforcement officer.
He was convicted of a
probation violation in 2018
after he was charged with shoplifting.
Both Barnhill's son and Gregory McMichael
were involved in that investigation.
And Barnhill advised Glynn County Police
not to charge the man even
before he was appointed
to prosecute the case.
Barnhill admitted that he knew
about the conflicts of interest for
"three or four weeks"
before recusing himself.
For reasons that should be obvious,
the victim's past criminal history
is almost always irrelevant
and unfairly prejudicial
to the prosecution of the
person that killed that person.
Are there exceptions to that,
but in this particular case,
I don't think there's any way
that it would come in front of a jury,
at least with respect to the McMichaels.
But the way that Barnhill
handled his appointment
and recusal is almost
universally seen as problematic.
If you're too conflicted
to handle the case,
you should not be giving your opinion
about whether crimes were committed.
That's the entire purpose of recusal.
But there's more evidence
that Barnhill was biased.
He commented that Arbery's
"mental health records
and prior convictions
"demonstrated his aggressive nature."
He also disparaged Arbery's
family saying the family
are not strangers to the
local criminal justice system.
From best we can tell,
Ahmaud's older brother
has gone to prison in the past
and is currently in the Glynn jail,
without bond awaiting
new felony prosecution.
It also appears a cousin
has been prosecuted
by DA Johnson's office.
Now, none of that is
relevant to the prosecution
of someone who killed a victim here.
It wouldn't have been relevant
if these things had happened
in the McMichaels's family,
but it's doubly so when you're talking
about the potential victim
in a criminal case as well.
So that information
was completely improper
to potentially taint potential jury pool.
And remember, when we're evaluating
whether a person has a
conflict of interest,
we're concerned about
that person being biased.
Barnhill's statements about
the Arbery family create,
at a minimum, the appearance of bias.
And again, the family
status and even Arbery's
own criminal history aren't relevant.
Now, the National District
Attorneys Association,
which has 5000 members
and represents two thirds
of Georgia's prosecutors
condemned Barnhill
for making these statements, stating,
"We must strongly disagree
"with District Attorney
George Barnhill's decision
"to share his opinion on whether
Greg and Travis McMichael
"should be arrested after
he decided to recuse himself
"from the case."
Georgia Attorney General Chris
Carr ordered an investigation
into the acts of both Glynn
County district attorneys
for failing to disclose
information indicating
that they had conflicts of interest.
So in the wake of this
generally terrible situation
all around, at the request
of Governor Brian Kemp,
the Georgia Bureau of Investigation
opened an investigation
on May 5th, 2020.
GBI reviewed the evidence and
canvassed the neighborhood.
The GBI quickly arrested the McMichaels
on felony murder charges.
And breaking as of today,
Bryan was arrested on
charges of felony murder
for his participation in the affair.
And remember that when you're
talking about a conspiracy
to commit a dangerous felony,
even those individuals
that don't do the shooting
can be guilty of the murders
that result from the scheme.
And I'm sure more will come
out about Bryan's participation
or lack thereof here.
And what he agreed to participate in
or his implied participation
in what the McMichaels intended to do
will be incredibly crucial here
as to whether Bryan himself
is a co-conspirator or liable
or guilty of the felony murder
that may have resulted.
- I can tell you that if we
believe he was a witness,
we wouldn't have arrested him.
- So Gregory and Travis McMichael
have been charged with felony murder.
Felony murder is a legal doctrine
that allows the defendant
to be charged with murder
for any killing that occurs
in the course of a dangerous felony,
even if the death is accidental.
For felony murder charges,
there needs to be at least two crimes.
The first crime is a dangerous felony.
A serious or inherently dangerous felony
can be cruelty to children,
burglary, arson, rape,
battery, or kidnapping.
And the second crime in a felony murder
is the death or murder that
results from the crime,
either intentionally or by accident,
or as a foreseeable result of
the felony being committed.
Now, if you watch a lot
of lawyer or police shows,
you might be thinking now,
hold on, I thought murder
requires intense and planning.
If the person didn't plan
or intend to murder someone,
they can't be charged with murder
because they don't have
the requisite mental state.
Well, that's generally not the case.
Felony murder does not
require intent to kill
or murder someone,
it only requires the intent to enter
into that first serious
or dangerous felony.
Therefore accidents attempts and mistakes
are not a defense to a
felony murder charge.
A person can be guilty of murder
during the course of a dangerous felony,
even if the person is not the killer.
So if you form a conspiracy
to commit a serious or dangerous felony,
and you're not even the
one that does the killing,
but your co-conspirator does,
you can be held responsible
for the felony murder
of that other person.
The most common example of this
is when people try to rob a bank
and someone dies during the robbery.
Even the getaway driver can
be charged with felony murder.
Even if that person never
sets foot inside the bank,
didn't intend to kill someone,
and never pulled the trigger
that ultimately killed the
person inside the bank.
The rationale is that
without the commission
of the inherently dangerous felony,
the murder would not have been committed.
Therefore, the murder is no different
from the rest of the crime,
even if it wasn't planned.
And here we have a number of
potentially dangerous felonies
that might give rise to the
predicate for felony murder.
We have potential kidnapping,
we have potential assault,
potential assault with a deadly weapon.
I mean, there's a lot that can happen
when you go around toting
a shotgun or a pistol
and start trying to accost
people on the street.
And as we discussed,
the mental state, the premeditation
that is usually required
for murder is not necessary
in a felony murder context.
But one thing that I've seen bandied
about is a potential self-defense
and stand your ground defense.
Now, self-defense could potentially
be a defense to felony murder.
But Georgia Law says that a
person may only use deadly force
if they think it's necessary
to prevent their own death
or "great bodily injury to
themselves or other people,
"or force is necessary to
prevent a forcible felony
"such as rape."
Now, Travis McMichael claims
that Ahmaud rushed him,
trying to grab his shotgun
and he feared for his life.
That's what Prosecutor
Barnhill concluded that,
"given the fact that
Arbery initiated the fight,
"at the point Arbery grabbed
the shotgun, under Georgia Law,
"McMichael was allowed to use deadly force
"to protect himself."
That's probably not the case.
Lethal force is not justified
if the person who used deadly
force was the aggressor
and didn't try to withdraw
from the situation.
Arguably, the McMichaels
were indeed the aggressors themselves.
Arbery wasn't fleeing or
committing a violent felony.
And arguably, Travis should have withdrawn
from the situation that he created.
He could have gotten back in the truck,
he could have walked backwards,
there's a lot that one can do,
especially when you're holding a shotgun.
And self-defense also
doesn't apply if the person
who used the lethal
force initially provoked
the force being used.
Arguably, the McMichaels might
have provoked the situation
by driving out in front of Ahmaud Arbery
with guns and hand
getting out of the truck
and accosting him.
Even if they were privileged to use force,
which query whether they were,
it's unlikely that they were
privileged to use deadly force
when just trying to detain
an individual on the street.
And I've also seen a lot of people talk
about Georgia's Stand Your Ground law.
Stand Your Ground law is an
extension of the Castle Doctrine
which allows people in
their homes to use force,
including deadly force,
to defend themselves against an intruder.
Now under this law,
a person doesn't have a duty to retreat
if they are attacked
inside of their own house.
However, Stand Your Ground
laws are not meant to permit
a person to initiate a
physical encounter away
from their home and then
kill their adversary.
You can imagine that
if that were the case,
then you would always be
incentivized to kill a person
that you get in a fight with
because you're standing your ground.
And the person who died wouldn't be there
to dispute your side of the story.
That's why Stand Your Ground law
is typically not a valid defense
when the shooter initiates the encounter
or is outside of the house.
And even if that defense
did apply to the McDaniels,
you might then assume that it applies
to Ahmaud Arbery as well
because he would have had a
right to stand his ground.
The video shows that Arbery was
caught between two vehicles.
He justifiably potentially
feared for his life
because the McMichaels were
the ones who were armed
and reaching for his shotgun
was arguably the only way
that he could save his own life,
which takes us to the
law of citizen's arrest.
The McMichaels say that their
actions were permissible
because they were trying to
make a "citizen's arrest."
Now, most state codes do have
a citizen's arrest statute
which authorizes a private citizen
to detain a criminal suspect
in the absence of law enforcement.
But a citizen's arrest
is greatly misunderstood.
People who are not police
are not empowered to
act like police officers
whenever they feel like it.
You can't just roam the
streets looking for criminals
and then arrest them,
let alone take them
down with lethal force.
And in fact,
the law only applies
to a very narrow range of circumstances.
If we look at Georgia's
citizen's arrest statute,
first of all,
the person initiating the arrest
needs to have a reasonable
and probable grounds that
someone committed a crime
in his or her actual presence,
or within his or her immediate knowledge.
Second to effectuate a citizen's arrest,
the person can only use reasonable force.
This means that using deadly force
is usually not reasonable.
And citizen's arrest laws are limited
because society doesn't
want private citizens
pursuing vigilante justice.
There's no need for people
to act as law enforcement
in circumstances where law
enforcement is readily available.
In particular, when you've
already made a call to 911.
Now on this point,
Prosecutor Barnhill's
letter seems to mix up
some of the presumptions and requirements
for the various defenses that
have been levied out there.
But let's talk about the impact
of a potential trespass by Ahmaud Arbery
or the impact of potential burglary.
Some people have speculated
that Ahmaud Arbery was guilty
of something because he
appears on a surveillance video
of a construction site.
Now, Arbery didn't steal anything.
We know this because the person
who owns the property confirm
that nothing was stolen.
- I don't want it to be put out
and misinterpreted for people to think
that I had accused Mr. Arbery of stealing,
or robbery because I never did.
- And in the McMichael's
statements to the police,
they say that they didn't
see Arbery carrying
anything down the street.
So that likely takes
burglary off the table.
But I guess that doesn't necessarily
rule out attempted burglary,
if that was in fact what
Mr. Aubrey intended to do,
though that would be questionable.
But what about trespass?
In Georgia, a person
commits criminal trespass
if they, one, intentionally
damage any property
of another without consent of that person,
or two, they knowingly and
without authority enter
onto a person's property
for an unlawful purpose,
or they enter after the owner
told them entry is forbidden,
or three, they remain on the
premises after receiving notice
from the owner that they should leave.
Now, none of these circumstances
appear to apply here.
There was no property damage or theft.
At this point, there's no
evidence that Arbery walked
through the site for an unlawful purpose,
nor was he previously told to leave.
And in fact, it appears that
other people besides Ahmaud
were on this property doing
sort of exactly the same thing.
But even if it were the case
that Ahmaud Arbery had
committed criminal trespass,
under these circumstances,
it would be a minor
misdemeanor under Georgia Law.
And for very good reasons,
the law does not permit
someone to use deadly force
to detain someone who has
committed a misdemeanor.
It probably doesn't even allow the police
to use deadly force in
that particular situation.
And of course, there are very
good public policy reasons
why this is the case.
We probably as a society
shouldn't be comfortable
with basically sentencing
some people to death
for misdemeanor violations.
You can't start firing at people
for jaywalking across the street.
And then finally,
the other defense that I see bandied about
in support of the McMichaels
in this particular case,
is that Greg McMichael
was effectively deputized
by the police to take
exactly this kind of action.
And in fact, Georgia
TV station is reporting
that Greg McDaniel is the one
who leaked the cell phone video believing
it would mobilize people to his side.
- [Reporter] Confirmed today
that it was Gregory McMichael,
Travis's father,
who gave the video to a radio station.
- [Reporter] And Tucker
hoped when the video showed
what actually occurred,
it with ease racial
tensions in the community.
"I didn't want the neighborhood
to become a Ferguson,"
he said.
- Of course, the video has
had the opposite effect,
mainly sparking anger and controversy.
But evidently, Larry
English who owned the house
that Ahmaud Arbery potentially
visited in February
before he was killed
and reached out to police
in December of 2019.
And in response to
Larry English's inquiry,
Officer Robert Rash said on
December 20th, 2019 Greg,
meaning Greg McMichael is
retired law enforcement
and also a retired investigator
for the DA's office.
Rash also included
McMichael's phone number
and conveyed the message
that McMichael said,
"Please call him day or night
"when you get action on your camera."
- And my cameras might well, notify me
and let me know somebody
was on the property.
- As far as I can tell,
this does not have the effect
of deputizing a private citizen
to act as police law
enforcement in a private matter.
There's no such thing as
being effectively deputized.
This isn't an old west movie.
This doesn't have the effect
of giving Greg McMichael
any additional privilege
to use deadly force
or even to use regular force,
or reasonable force in the first instance.
It doesn't really have
any effect on what he can
and cannot do in this
particular situation.
Now, there's no happy ending here.
There's no pithy segue.
If we've learned anything here,
it's that we need to
make the most of life.
And one of the best ways of
doing that is with Skillshare.
I've long been a fan of the fact
that you can learn almost
anything on Skillshare
and we can all try and find a little piece
through intentional living,
like with Erin Boyle's
class, Everyday Minimalism.
Find calm and creativity in living simply.
In her class, Erin teaches
you how living with less
can unlock a life of more energy savings
and more time to do the
things that you love.
It's a great way to beautify your home
by calling what you already own
because we're spending so
much time at home these days.
And when I went down this rabbit hole,
I also really enjoyed architect
Donald Ratner's class,
using design psychology
to maximize creativity
at home and at work.
There are just so many
great classes on Skillshare
because Skillshare is an
online learning community
that has tens of thousands
of classes on everything,
like music, design,
technology, and business.
A yearly membership is
less than $10 per month,
but the first 1000 LegalEagles
will get two free months of Skillshare
when you click on the link below,
plus it really helps out this channel.
The free premium membership
gives you unlimited access
to must-know topics so you
can improve your skills
and learn new things,
all free for two months.
All you have to do is click on
the link in the description.
So do you agree with my analysis?
Leave your objections in the comments
and check out my other
real law reviews over here
where I cover the legal news of the day
and try to explain
everything that's relevant
for your understanding.
So, click on this playlist
and I'll see you in court.